Clarify the differences between both authentication APIs (#2159)
matrix-org/matrix-spec: content/client-server-api/_index.md

investigate [macaroons](http://research.google.com/pubs/pub41892.html).
{{% /boxes/note %}}

Since Matrix 1.15, the Client-Server specification supports two authentication
APIs:

* The [legacy API](#legacy-api)
* The [OAuth 2.0 API](#oauth-20-api)

The legacy API has existed since the first version of the Matrix specification,
while the OAuth 2.0 API has been introduced to rely on a industry standard and
its experience rather than implementing a custom protocol that might not follow
the best practices.

> A homeserver may support one of those two APIs, or both. Both APIs are

Author: Applied.

incompatible, which means that after logging in, clients MUST only use the API
that was used to obtain their current access token.

{{% boxes/note %}}
Currently the OAuth 2.0 API doesn't cover all the use cases of the legacy API,
like ones that don't rely on a web browser for automation or for endpoints used

> by application services that depend on the [UIA API](#user-interactive-authentication-api).

Author: Yes its probably badly worded, this is about the use of `/login` and `/register` by appservices: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/application-service-api/#server-admin-style-permissions

> like ones that don't rely on a web browser for automation or for endpoints used
> by application services that depend on the [UIA API](#user-interactive-authentication-api).

Reviewer: Right, but those don't use UIA?

```suggestion
such as automated applications that cannot use a web browser, or
user management by [application services](application-service-api/#server-admin-style-permissions).
```

{{% /boxes/note %}}

{{% boxes/note %}}
[MSC3824](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3824)
specifies a way for servers to implement the OAuth 2.0 API while staying
backwards-compatible with existing clients by using the [`m.login.sso`](#sso-client-loginauthentication)
method, and for clients to improve their compatibility with the OAuth 2.0 API
with minimal changes.
{{% /boxes/note %}}

> 

Author: Removed.

and refresh tokens are now bound to the device associated with the
initial refresh token.

> During login or registration, the access token should be associated to a

Author: Applied.

with an `M_USER_LOCKED` error code, cannot obtain a new access token until
the account has been [unlocked](#account-locking).

### Account management

With the legacy API, a client can use several endpoints to allow the user to
manage their account like [changing their password](#password-management),
[managing their devices](#device-management) or
[deactivating their account](#account-deactivation).

With the OAuth 2.0 API, all account management is done via the homeserver's web
UI.

{{% boxes/note %}}
[MSC4191](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4191)
provides a way for homeservers to provide the URL of their account management UI,
which can be used by clients to redirect the users to the relevant part of the
interface depending on the action that the user wishes to take.
{{% /boxes/note %}}

> 

Author: Removed.

### Legacy API

{{% changed-in v="1.15" %}}

This is the first authentication API that was introduced since the first version
of the Client-Server specification and uses custom APIs. Contrary to the OAuth
2.0 API, account management is primarily done in the client's interface and as

> such it might not require the end user to be redirected to a web UI in their

Author: Applied.

or best practice recommendations.

The main change for end users with this API is that all the account management
occurs in their browser on the homeserver's web UI. This is where they will
register a new account or log into an existing account and authorize a client to
access their Matrix account. This means that the homeserver has complete control
over the requirements to create a new account and is not limited by the steps
defined in this specification. It also means that less trust is given to clients
because they don't have access to the user's credentials anymore.

{{% boxes/warning %}}
The [User-Interactive Authentication API](#user-interactive-authentication-api)
is not compatible with the OAuth 2.0 API, so the endpoints that depend on it for
authentication can't be used when an access token is obtained with this API.

Homeservers may provide alternatives to those endpoints in their web UI (like
[MSC4191](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4191) for
account management), or disable UIA in certain circumstances (like
[MSC4190](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4190) for

> managing devices for application services).

Author: Removed.
